        string str1 = "The changes of state of the system are called transitions. The probabilities associated with various state changes are called transition probabilities. The process is characterized by a state space, a transition matrix describing the probabilities of particular transitions, and an initial state (or initial distribution) across the state space. By convention, we assume all possible states and transitions have been included in the definition of the process, so there is always a next state, and the process does not terminate.A discrete-time random process involves a system which is in a certain state at each step, with the state changing randomly between steps. The steps are often thought of as moments in time, but they can equally well refer to physical distance or any other discrete measurement. Formally, the steps are the integers or natural numbers, and the random process is a mapping of these to states. The Markov property states that the conditional probability distribution for the system at the next step (and in fact at all future steps) depends only on the current state of the system, and not additionally on the state of the system at previous steps.Since the system changes randomly, it is generally impossible to predict with certainty the state of a Markov chain at a given point in the future. However, the statistical properties of the system's future can be predicted. In many applications, it is these statistical properties that are important.";

        string str2 = "than people who score lower on the same test, but we cannot make very accurate predictionsabout exactly how any one person will perform.Another reason that it is difficult to predict behavior is that almost all behavior is multiplydetermined, or produced by many factors. And these factors occur at different levels ofexplanation. We have seen, for instance, that depression is caused by lower-level genetic factors,by medium-level personal factors, and by higher-level social and cultural factors. You shouldalways be skeptical about people who attempt to explain important human behaviors, such asviolence, child abuse, poverty, anxiety, or depression, in terms of a single cause.Furthermore, these multiple causes are not independent of one another; they are associated suchthat when one cause is present other causes tend to be present as well. This overlap makes itdifficult to pinpoint which cause or causes are operating. For instance, some people may bedepressed because of biological imbalances in neurotransmitters in their brain. The resultingdepression may lead them to act more negatively toward other people around them, which thenleads those other people to respond more negatively to them, which then increases theirdepression. As a result, the biological determinants of depression become intertwined with thesocial responses of other people, making it difficult to disentangle the effects of each cause.Another difficulty in studying psychology is that much human behavior is caused by factors thatare outside our conscious awareness, making it impossible for us, as individuals, to reallyunderstand them. The role of unconscious processes was emphasized in the theorizing of theAustrian neurologist Sigmund Freud (1856–1939), who argued that many psychologicaldisorders were caused by memories that we have repressed and thus remain outside ourconsciousness. Unconscious processes will be an important part of our study of psychology, andwe will see that current research has supported many of Freud’s ideas about the importance ofthe unconscious in guiding behavior. ";

        string str3 = "In this section we will review the history of psychology with a focus on the important questionsthat psychologists ask and the major approaches (or schools) of psychological inquiry. Theschools of psychology that we will review are summarized in Table 1.2 The Most ImportantApproaches (Schools) of Psychology, and Figure 1.5 Timeline Showing Some of the MostImportant Psychologists presents a timeline of some of the most important psychologists,beginning with the early Greek philosophers and extending to the present day. Table 1.2 TheMost Important Approaches (Schools) of Psychology and Figure 1.5 Timeline Showing Someof the Most Important Psychologists both represent a selection of the most important schoolsand people; to mention all the approaches and all the psychologists who have contributed to thefield is not possible in one chapter.The earliest psychologists that we know about are the Greek philosophers Plato (428–347 BC)and Aristotle (384–322 BC). These philosophers asked many of the same questions that today’spsychologists ask; for instance, they questioned the distinction between nature and nurture andthe existence of free will. In terms of the former, Plato argued on the nature side, believing thatcertain kinds of knowledge are innate or inborn, whereas Aristotle was more on the nurture side,believing that each child is born as an “empty slate” (in Latin atabula rasa) and that knowledgeis primarily acquired through learning and experience.European philosophers continued to ask these fundamental questions during the Renaissance. Forinstance, the French philosopher René Descartes (1596–1650) also considered the issue of freewill, arguing in its favor and believing that the mind controls the body through the pineal glandin the brain (an idea that made some sense at the time but was later proved incorrect). Descartesalso believed in the existence of innate natural abilities. A scientist as well as a philosopher,Descartes dissected animals and was among the first to understand that the nerves controlled themuscles. He also addressed the relationship between mind (the mental aspects of life) and body ";

        string str4 = "respond that they had heard the sound. These studies marked the first time researchers realizedthat there is a difference between the sensation of a stimulus and theperception of that stimulus,and the idea of using reaction times to study mental events has now become a mainstay ofcognitive psychology.Perhaps the best known of the structuralists was Edward Bradford Titchener (1867–1927).Titchener was a student of Wundt who came to the United States in the late 1800s and founded alaboratory at Cornell University. In his research using introspection, Titchener and his studentsclaimed to have identified more than 40,000 sensations, including those relating to vision,hearing, and taste.An important aspect of the structuralist approach was that it was rigorous and scientific. Theresearch marked the beginning of psychology as a science, because it demonstrated that mentalevents could be quantified. But the structuralists also discovered the limitations of introspection.Even highly trained research participants were often unable to report on their subjectiveexperiences. When the participants were asked to do simple math problems, they could easily dothem, but they could not easily answer how they did them. Thus the structuralists were the first torealize the importance of unconscious processes—that many important aspects of humanpsychology occur outside our conscious awareness, and that psychologists cannot expectresearch participants to be able to accurately report on all of their experiences.Functionalism and Evolutionary PsychologyIn contrast to Wundt, who attempted to understand the nature of consciousness, the goal ofWilliam James and the other members of the school of functionalism was to understand whyanimals and humans have developed the particular psychological aspects that they currentlypossess(Hunt, 1993). [5] For James, one’s thinking was relevant only to one’s behavior. As he putit in his psychology textbook, “My thinking is first and last and always for the sake of my doing”(James, 1890). [6]James and the other members of the functionalist school were influenced by Charles Darwin’s(1809–1882) theory of natural selection, which proposed that the physical characteristics ofanimals and humans evolved because they were useful, or functional. The functionalists believed";

        string str5 = "that Darwin’s theory applied to psychological characteristics too. Just as some animals havedeveloped strong muscles to allow them to run fast, the human brain, so functionalists thought,must have adapted to serve a particular function in human experience.Although functionalism no longer exists as a school of psychology, its basic principles have beenabsorbed into psychology and continue to influence it in many ways. The work of thefunctionalists has developed into the field ofevolutionary psychology, a branch of psychologythat applies the Darwinian theory of natural selection to human and animal behavior(Dennett,1995; Tooby & Cosmides, 1992). [7]Evolutionary psychology accepts the functionalists’ basicassumption, namely that many human psychological systems, including memory, emotion, andpersonality, serve key adaptive functions. As we will see in the chapters to come, evolutionarypsychologists use evolutionary theory to understand many different behaviors including romanticattraction, stereotypes and prejudice, and even the causes of many psychological disorders.A key component of the ideas of evolutionary psychology is fitness. Fitness refers to the extent towhich having a given characteristic helps the individual organism survive and reproduce at ahigher rate than do other members of the species who do not have the characteristic. Fitterorganisms pass on their genes more successfully to later generations, making the characteristicsthat produce fitness more likely to become part of the organism’s nature than characteristics thatdo not produce fitness. For example, it has been argued that the emotion of jealousy has survivedover time in men because men who experience jealousy are more fit than men who do not.According to this idea, the experience of jealously leads men to be more likely to protect theirmates and guard against rivals, which increases their reproductive success (Buss, 2000). [8]Despite its importance in psychological theorizing, evolutionary psychology also has somelimitations. One problem is that many of its predictions are extremely difficult to test. Unlike thefossils that are used to learn about the physical evolution of species, we cannot know whichpsychological characteristics our ancestors possessed or did not possess; we can only makeguesses about this. Because it is difficult to directly test evolutionary theories, it is alwayspossible that the explanations we apply are made up after the fact to account for observed data(Gould & Lewontin, 1979). [9] Nevertheless, the evolutionary approach is important to";

        string str6 = "Behaviorism and the Question of Free WillAlthough they differed in approach, both structuralism and functionalism were essentially studiesof the mind. The psychologists associated with the school of behaviorism, on the other hand,were reacting in part to the difficulties psychologists encountered when they tried to useintrospection to understand behavior. Behaviorism is a school of psychology that is based on thepremise that it is not possible to objectively study the mind, and therefore that psychologistsshould limit their attention to the study of behavior itself. Behaviorists believe that the humanmind is a “black box” into which stimuli are sent and from which responses are received. Theyargue that there is no point in trying to determine what happens in the box because we cansuccessfully predict behavior without knowing what happens inside the mind. Furthermore,behaviorists believe that it is possible to develop laws of learning that can explain all behaviors.The first behaviorist was the American psychologist John B. Watson (1878–1958). Watson wasinfluenced in large part by the work of the Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov (1849–1936), whohad discovered that dogs would salivate at the sound of a tone that had previously beenassociated with the presentation of food. Watson and the other behaviorists began to use theseideas to explain how events that people and other organisms experienced in their environment(stimuli) could produce specific behaviors (responses). For instance, in Pavlov’s researchthe stimulus (either the food or, after learning, the tone) would produce the response of salivationin the dogs.In his research Watson found that systematically exposing a child to fearful stimuli in thepresence of objects that did not themselves elicit fear could lead the child to respond with afearful behavior to the presence of the stimulus (Watson & Rayner, 1920; Beck, Levinson, &Irons, 2009). [11] In the best known of his studies, an 8-month-old boy named Little Albert wasused as the subject. Here is a summary of the findings:The boy was placed in the middle of a room; a white laboratory rat was placed near him and hewas allowed to play with it. The child showed no fear of the rat. In later trials, the researchersmade a loud sound behind Albert’s back by striking a steel bar with a hammer whenever thebaby touched the rat. The child cried when he heard the noise. After several such pairings of the ";

        string str7 = "Psychologists have found that there is a fundamental difference in social norms between Westerncultures (including those in the United States, Canada, Western Europe, Australia, and NewZealand) and East Asian cultures (including those in China, Japan, Taiwan, Korea, India, andSoutheast Asia). Norms in Western cultures are primarily oriented toward individualism, whichis about valuing the self and one’s independence from others. Children in Western cultures aretaught to develop and to value a sense of their personal self, and to see themselves in large partas separate from the other people around them. Children in Western cultures feel special aboutthemselves; they enjoy getting gold stars on their projects and the best grade in the class. Adultsin Western cultures are oriented toward promoting their own individual success, frequently incomparison to (or even at the expense of) others.Norms in the East Asian culture, on the other hand, are oriented toward interdependenceor collectivism. In these cultures children are taught to focus on developing harmonious socialrelationships with others. The predominant norms relate to group togetherness andconnectedness, and duty and responsibility to one’s family and other groups. When asked todescribe themselves, the members of East Asian cultures are more likely than those fromWestern cultures to indicate that they are particularly concerned about the interests of others,including their close friends and their colleagues.Another important cultural difference is the extent to which people in different cultures arebound by social norms and customs, rather than being free to express their own individualitywithout considering social norms (Chan, Gelfand, Triandis, & Tzeng, 1996). [25] Cultures alsodiffer in terms of personal space, such as how closely individuals stand to each other whentalking, as well as the communication styles they employ.It is important to be aware of cultures and cultural differences because people with differentcultural backgrounds increasingly come into contact with each other as a result of increasedtravel and immigration and the development of the Internet and other forms of communication.In the United States, for instance, there are many different ethnic groups, and the proportion ofthe population that comes from minority (non-White) groups is increasing from year to year. Thesocial-cultural approach to understanding behavior reminds us again of the difficulty of making ";

        string str8 = "The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends thatchildren’s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school.This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learningwhich continues to shape our system and causes a gap between theschool, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed onthe basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. Theyalso attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharpboundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measureswill take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred systemof education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).The success of this effort depends on the steps that schoolprincipals and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect ontheir own learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions.We must recognise that, given space, time and freedom, childrengenerate new knowledge by engaging with the information passed onto them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basisof examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sitesof learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possibleif we perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not asreceivers of a fixed body of knowledge.These aims imply considerable change in school routines and modeof functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary asrigour in implementing the annual calendar so that the requirednumber of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The methodsused for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective thistextbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience,rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers havetried to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuringand reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater considerationfor child psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbookattempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and spaceto opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in smallgroups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committeeresponsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of theadvisory group in Social Sciences, Professor Hari Vasudevan, and theChief Advisor for this book, Professor Neeladri Bhattacharya, Centre forHistorical Studies, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi for guidingthe work of this committee. Several teachers contributed to thedevelopment of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals formaking this possible. We are indebted to the institutions andorganisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon their";

        string str9 = "What defines the focus of this book? What does it seek to do? Howis it linked to what has been studied in earlier classes?In Classes VI to VIII we looked at Indian history from earlybeginnings to modern times, with a focus on one chronologicalperiod in each year. Then in the books for Classes IX and X, theframe of reference changed. We looked at a shorter period of time,focusing specifically on a close study of the contemporary world.We moved beyond territorial boundaries, beyond the limits of nationstates, to see how different people in different places have playedtheir part in the making of the modern world. The history of Indiabecame connected to a wider inter-linked history. Subsequently inClass XI we studied Themes in World History, expanding ourchronological focus, looking at the vast span of years from thebeginning of human life to the present, but selecting only a set ofthemes for serious exploration. This year we will study Themes inIndian History.The book begins with Harappa and ends with the framing of theIndian Constitution. What it offers is not a general survey of fivemillennia, but a close study of select themes. The history books inearlier years have already acquainted you with Indian history. It istime we explored some themes in greater detail.In choosing the themes we have tried to ensure that we learnabout developments in different spheres – economic, cultural, social,political, and religious – even as we attempt to break the boundariesbetween them. Some themes in the book will introduce you to thepolitics of the times and the nature of authority and power; othersexplore the way societies are organised, and the way they functionand change; still others tell us about religious life and ritualpractices, about the working of economies, and the changes withinrural and urban societies.Each of these themes will also allow you to have a closer look atthe historians’ craft. To retrieve the past, historians have to findsources that make the past accessible. But sources do not just revealthe past; historians have to grapple with sources, interpret them,and make them speak. This is what makes history exciting. Thesame sources can tell us new things if we ask new questions, andengage with them in new ways. So we need to see how historiansread sources, and how they discover new things in old sources.ut historians do not only re-examine old records. They discovernew ones. Sometimes these could be chance discoveries.Archaeologists may unexpectedly come across seals and moundsthat provide clues to the existence of a site of an ancient civilisation.Rummaging through the dusty records of a district collectorate aRationalised 2023-24xhistorian may trip over a bundle of records that contain legal casesof local disputes, and these may open up a new world of village lifeseveral centuries back. Yet are such discoveries only accidents? Youmay bump into a bundle of old records in an archive, open it upand see it, without discovering the significance of the source. Thesource may mean nothing to you unless you have relevant questionsin mind. You have to track the source, read the text, follow the clues,and make the inter-connections before you can reconstruct the past.The physical discovery of a record does not simply open up thepast. When Alexander Cunningham first saw a Harappan seal, hecould make no sense of it. Only much later was the significance ofthe seals discovered.In fact when historians begin to ask new questions, explore newthemes, they have to often search for new types of sources. If wewish to know about revolutionaries and rebels, official sources canreveal only a partial picture, one that will be shaped by officialcensure and prejudice. We need to look for other sources – diariesof rebels, their personal letters, their writings and pronouncements.And these are not always easy to come by. If we have to understandexperiences of people, then oral sources might reveal more thanwritten sources.s the vision of history broadens, historians begin tracking newsources, searching for new clues to understand the past. And whenthat happens, the conception of what constitutes a source itselfchanges. There was a time when only written records wereacknowledged as authentic. What was written could be verified,cited, and cross-checked. Oral evidence was never considered a validsource: who was to guarantee its authenticity and verifiability? Thismistrust of oral sources has not yet disappeared, but oral evidencehas been innovatively used to uncover experiences that no otherrecord could reveal.Through the book this year, you will enter the world of historians,accompany them in their search for new clues, and see how theycarry on their dialogues with the past. You will witness the way theytease out meaning out of records, read inscriptions, excavatearchaeological sites, make sense of beads and bones, interpret theepics, look at the stupas and buildings, examine paintings andphotographs, interpret police reports and revenue records, and listento the voices of the past. Each theme will explore the peculiaritiesand possibilities of one particular type of source. It will discuss whata source can tell and what it cannot.This is Part II, of Themes in Indian History. Part III will follow.NEELADRI BHATTACHARYAChief Advisor, History";

        string str10 = "For the next two to three centuries,Buddhism remained one amongseveral minor sects but, under theMauryan emperor Ashoka the Great(304–232 bce), it became India’sstate religion. Ashoka’s reign hadproceeded initially through bloodyconquest, but in around 261 bce hehad a change of heart. From then heembraced a new model of kingshipand religious philosophy based on acreed of tolerance and non-violence.He extended Mauryan control and,his Buddhism proving a powerfulunifying force, succeeded in joiningall of India, except the southern tip,into an empire of 30 million people.A world religionHaving established Buddhism asthe state religion, Ashoka foundedmonasteries, and sponsoredscholarship. He sent Buddhistmissionaries to every corner of thesubcontinent and abroad as far asGreece, Syria, and Egypt. Hismissions established Buddhisminitially as an elite pursuit, but thereligion went on to take root at alllevels of society in Sri Lanka,Southeast Asia, along the Silk Roadin the Indo–Greek kingdoms (inmodern-day Pakistan andAfghanistan), and later in China,Japan, and Tibet. In India—itsbirthplace—Buddhism started todecline after Ashoka’s death in 232bce, affected by a resurgence ofHinduism and then the arrival ofIslam. Outside India, however, itstradition and scholarship flourished,evolving into multiple strandsincluding Zen Buddhism, Theravadaor Hinayana Buddhism, MahayanaBuddhism, and Varayana Buddhism.The first religion to have spreadwidely beyond the society in whichit originated—so the first “worldreligion”—Buddhism is also one ofthe oldest, having been practicedsince the 6th century bce.";
        string str11 = "The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends thatchildren’s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school.This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learningwhich continues to shape our system and causes a gap between theschool, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed onthe basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. Theyalso attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharpboundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measureswill take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred systemof education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).The success of this effort depends on the steps that schoolprincipals and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect ontheir own learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions.We must recognise that, given space, time and freedom, childrengenerate new knowledge by engaging with the information passed onto them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basisof examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sitesof learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possibleif we perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not asreceivers of a fixed body of knowledge.These aims imply considerable change in school routines and modeof functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary asrigour in implementing the annual calendar so that the requirednumber of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The methodsused for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective thistextbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience,rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers havetried to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuringand reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater considerationfor child psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbookattempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and spaceto opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in smallgroups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committeeresponsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of theadvisory group in Social Sciences, Professor Hari Vasudevan, and theChief Advisor for this book, Professor Neeladri Bhattacharya, Centre forHistorical Studies, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi for guidingthe work of this committee. Several teachers contributed to thedevelopment of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals formaking this possible. We are indebted to the institutions andorganisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon their";
